# Multipurpose Lab-design CNC

Development of a lab-design positioning system (CNC machine) with interchangeable head for different applications.

The positioning system allows precise control of the position and speed of the head along the stage plane. The distance between the head and the stage can be adjusted manually using a hand screw. Three head modules are available: (i) painting head, (ii) pencil head and (iii) cleaning head.

The painting head allows an airbrush to be attached and painting to be carried out in a controlled manner. The module was designed to work with a double-action airbrush. The air flow and paint intensity are controlled by a servo motor.

The pencil head allows a pencil or a pen to be attached. By activating a servo motor, the pencil/pencil is brought closer to the stage, allowing lines or curves to be drawn according to the movement of the positioning system. The pencil head can be used to perform pencil tests. The module ensures that the force, inclination and path traveled are kept constant throughout the test. According to the desired tilt angle, the can be fixed either 45° or 90° in relation to the stage.

The cleaning head includes a linear rod. The rod has a cylindrical end, allowing a cloth to be attached to assess the anti-stain properties of materials. The anti-stain property can be associated with the ease with which the material's surface can be cleaned. Thus, to characterize anti-stain property, the surface being evaluated can be contaminated and then cleaned. Images of the surface are captured before and after cleaning, allowing the surface's susceptibility to cleaning to be quantified. Images of the cloth used for cleaning can also be captured, in order to assess the ability to transfer contaminants to the cloth. To conduct the anti-stain test, it is necessary to ensure reproducibility in both contamination and cleaning steps. By using the cleaning head, it is possible to ensure that the cloth proximity to the contaminated surface, the cleaning path and the force are kept constant throughout the anti-stain test.

The electrical/electronic components, responsible for controlling the positioning system, are contained in a box that functions as a control panel, providing flexibility and safety in the use of the equipment. The control panel can be fully 3D printed, allowing the attachment of control boards (Arduino and CNC shield), command buttons (ON/OFF and emergency button), power source and cooling system.

The control of the positioning system (lab-design CNC) was performed using Grbl. To facilitate the insertion of commands by the user, the Universal G-Code Sender (UGS) was used. Grbl is free, open-source and high-performance software for controlling movement in machines, running directly on Arduino. UGS is a free gcode platform with several features for interfacing advanced CNC controls in different environments, such as Grbl.
In the root folder of the repository there is a text file (InstalationVer2.txt) with several instructions regarding the use of the positioning system. There you will find a description of the main elements used for control (stepper motor and servo motor), links to more information about the control programs used (Grbl, UGS and Arduino) and a step-by-step guide for initializing the device.
